Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.455

Page 1

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE DISTRICT OF UTAH
MEMORANDUM DECISION
AND ORDER
DENYING MOTION FOR
PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION

BOTANIC TONICS, LLC, et al.,
Plaintiffs,
v.
KELLY PHERSON, et al.,

Case No. 2:26-cv-267-HCN-DBP

Defendants.

Howard C. Nielson, Jr.
United States District Judge

Plaintiffs Botanic Tonics, LLC, and Global Kratom Coalition, Inc., sue various Utah state
officials seeking to enjoin enforcement of portions of Utah’s newly enacted Kratom Regulation
Act, which will otherwise take effect on May 6, 2026. The Plaintiffs request a preliminary
injunction. The court denies that request.
I.
Plaintiff Botanic Tonics is an Oklahoma-based “manufacturer, distributor, and seller,”
Dkt. No. 1 at ¶ 7, of a “combination kratom leaf and noble kava root dietary supplement”
marketed under the name feel free, Dkt. No. 2 at 4. This product is currently sold in 321 Utah
stores, see id. at 3, and Botanic Tonics’ CEO avers that Botanic Tonics had, until recently, a deal
to place feel free in an additional 852 retail store locations nationwide, see Dkt. No. 2-7 at 3.
Plaintiff Kratom Coalition, Inc. is an organization that “advocates for safe and responsible
natural kratom use and for federal and state regulation to ensure consumer safety and access to
natural kratom.” Dkt. No. 1 at ¶ 8. Plaintiffs represent that Kratom Coalition has four “sponsors.”
Id. Although Plaintiffs represent that Botanic Tonics is one of these sponsors, see id., they do not
identify the others. And while Plaintiffs appear to represent that the other sponsors of Kratom
Coalition sell mixtures of kratom leaf and kava root similar to feel free, see id., they do not

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.456

Page 2

identify these products by name. Nor do Plaintiffs identify any other specific kratom products
sold by Botanic Tonics or any of the other sponsors of the Kratom Coalition.
On March 26, 2026, Utah Governor Spencer Cox signed Senate Bill 45, the Kratom
Regulation Act, which will take effect on May 6 absent an injunction. See 2026 Utah Laws 480
(S.B. 45 S4); Dkt. No. 2-1. 1 The Plaintiffs maintain that this statute, which they refer to as the
KRA, will outlaw the distribution and sale of feel free, which combines kratom leaves with kava
root, because the statute prohibits any “kratom product” that is “mixed or packed with a
nonkratom substance unless the nonkratom substance is an inert encapsulating agent . . . .” New
Utah Code § 4-45-102(5); see also Dkt. No. 2 at 6. Plaintiffs represent that Botanic Tonics has
directed “all Utah direct to store distributors . . . to ensure all feel free Classic is either 100% sold
through or removed from store shelves no later than May 6, 2026.” Dkt. No. 2-2 at 2. And they
argue that Botanic Tonics will be irreparably injured absent an injunction because it will suffer
losses from this “cessation of all sales” of feel free, forfeit the benefit of “the sunk cost of all
related advertising,” and face “continuing brand dilution as a result of the elimination of its
product from Utah retail and elimination of its advertising associated with the product.” Dkt. No.
2 at 13.
The Plaintiffs argue that the provisions of the Kratom Regulation Act that will ban the
sale of feel free in Utah are preempted by various federal laws addressing dietary supplements.
See, e.g., id. at 2. They accordingly seek a preliminary injunction barring the Defendants—
various state officials who the Plaintiffs allege will be responsible for enforcing the Kratom

1

The court will refer to the Utah Code as it will be amended once the Kratom Regulation
Act takes effect as “new Utah Code.”
2

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.457

Page 3

Regulation Act—from enforcing this statute against them for distributing feel free pending the
disposition of this lawsuit.
II.
“Preliminary injunctive relief—whether a temporary restraining order or a preliminary
injunction—‘is an extraordinary remedy never awarded as of right.’” Schiermeyer ex rel.
Blockchain Game Partners, Inc. v. Thurston, 697 F. Supp. 3d 1265, 1269 (D. Utah 2023)
(quoting Winter v. Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 24 (2008)). Such relief is “the
exception rather than the rule” and will be granted only if “the movant’s right to relief [is] clear
and unequivocal.” Aposhian v. Barr, 958 F.3d 969, 978 (10th Cir. 2020) (cleaned up). A party
seeking such relief “must establish that he is likely to succeed on the merits, that he is likely to
suffer irreparable harm in the absence of preliminary relief, that the balance of equities tips in his
favor, and that an injunction is in the public interest.” Winter, 555 U.S. at 20.
“[E]ach of these elements is a prerequisite for obtaining” preliminary injunctive relief.
Diné Citizens Against Ruining Our Env’t v. Jewell, 839 F.3d 1276, 1281 (10th Cir. 2016). It
follows that “a plaintiff’s failure to prove any one of the four preliminary injunction factors
renders its request for injunctive relief unwarranted.” Village of Logan v. United States Dep’t of
Interior, 577 F. App’x 760, 766 (10th Cir. 2014) (unpublished).
The court concludes that the Plaintiffs have failed to show a likelihood of success on their
legal arguments that federal law preempts any relevant part of the Kratom Regulation Act. The
court accordingly denies their request for preliminary injunction without addressing the other
Winter factors.

3

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.458

Page 4

A.
“[T]he purpose of Congress is the ultimate touchstone in every pre-emption case.” Wyeth
v. Levine, 555 U.S. 555, 565 (2009) (cleaned up). “[I]n all pre-emption cases, and particularly in
those in which Congress has legislated in a field which the States have traditionally occupied,
[courts] start with the assumption that the historic police powers of the States were not to be
superseded by the Federal Act unless that was the clear and manifest purpose of Congress.” Id.
(cleaned up).
There are three types of preemption: 1) express preemption, which occurs when
the language of the federal statute reveals an express congressional intent to
preempt state law; 2) field preemption, which occurs when the federal scheme of
regulation is so pervasive that Congress must have intended to leave no room for
a State to supplement it; and 3) conflict preemption, which occurs either when
compliance with both the federal and state laws is a physical impossibility, or
when the state law stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of
the full purposes and objectives of Congress.
US Airways, Inc. v. O’Donnell, 627 F.3d 1318, 1324 (10th Cir. 2010) (cleaned up).
B.
The Plaintiffs first argue that the portions of the Kratom Regulation Act that would bar
feel free are expressly preempted by 21 U.S.C. § 343-1(a), which, they maintain, “forbids any
deviation from federal dietary supplement labeling requirements, including those germane to the
labeling of combination dietary supplements.” Dkt. No. 2 at 9. Plaintiffs contend that the “KRA
not only forbids combined kratom and nonkratom substance dietary supplements,” but also
“forbids their labeling, thus violating the express command in 21 U.S.C. § 343-1(a)(5) that state
dietary supplement labeling law be ‘identical’ to federal law.” Id.
Express preemption occurs only “when the language of the federal statue statute reveals
an express congressional intent to preempt state law.” O’Donnell, 627 F.3d at 1324. “If the
statute contains an express pre-emption clause, the task of statutory construction must in the first
4

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.459

Page 5

instance focus on the plain wording of the clause . . . .” CSX Transp., Inc. v. Easterwood, 507
U.S. 658, 664 (1993).
21 U.S.C. § 343-1(a)(5) provides that “no State . . . may directly or indirectly
establish . . . as to any food in interstate commerce . . . any requirement respecting any claim of
the type described in section 343(r)(1) of this title made in the label or labeling of food that is not
identical to the requirement of section 343(r) of this title . . . .” Section 343(r)(1), in turn,
addresses express or implicit claims made regarding either “the level of any nutrient” in the food
or “the relationship of any nutrient” in the food “to a disease or a health-related condition” that
do not comport with other statutory provisions.
The court need not explore what requirements these provisions may establish for labeling
kratom products—or, indeed, whether they apply to such products at all—because the text of the
statute makes clear that Congress intended to preempt only state requirements “respecting any
claim” made on a label that differ from federally established requirements. Id. § 343-1(a)(5)
(emphasis added). The challenged portions of the Kratom Regulation Act, by contrast, are silent
with respect to the labeling of products containing kratom like feel free; they merely prohibit the
sale of kratom mixed with any “nonkratom substance” other than an “inert encapsulating agent.”
New Utah Code § 4-45-102(5)(b). 2
Nothing in the plain language of Section 343-1 purports to preempt state-level bans on
substances. To be sure, a prohibited product cannot be sold no matter how it is labeled. But it
clearly does not follow that Congress intended to preempt any state regulation with such an

2

Other parts of the Kratom Regulation Act, such as new Utah Code § 4-45-104(1)(b), do
establish requirements regarding “product label[s]” on “kratom product[s]” that may be sold in
the State under the new law. But the Plaintiffs do not invoke these labeling provisions, much less
argue that these provisions affect their ability to sell feel free or that they would be able to sell
feel free but for the Kratom Regulation Act’s labeling provisions.
5

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.460

Page 6

oblique effect on labeling; to the contrary, the point of these federal provisions appears to be to
govern certain specific types of claims made on the labels of products that actually are sold, and
thus to prevent “misbrand[ing].” 21 U.S.C. § 343. For these reasons, the court has no difficulty
concluding that Plaintiffs have failed to demonstrate that they are likely to prevail on this
express-preemption claim. 3
C.
The Plaintiffs next argue that the Kratom Regulation Act is preempted because
“compliance with both” this Act and 21 U.S.C. §§ 321(ff) and 342(f) is “impossible.” Dkt. No. 2
at 2. “Even in the absence of an express pre-emption provision, the Court has found state law to

3

Plaintiffs also offer the following argument:

The KRA amends the pre-existing Utah law governing kratom, entitled the
Kratom Consumer Protection Act . . . , which pre-existing Act contains a
provision that prohibits labeling not in accordance with the Act. In Utah Code
Ann. § 4-45-102(4)(b), the definition of “kratom processor” includes anyone who
“advertises, represents, or holds oneself out as selling, preparing, or maintaining a
kratom product.” Labeling for prohibited kratom/nonkratom product
combinations is thus explicitly forbidden under the amended KRA.
Dkt. No. 2 at 8–9 (cleaned up). And in a footnote, the Plaintiffs argue that
[u]nder 21 U.S.C. § 321(m), “labeling” is defined as all labels and other written,
printed, or graphic matter upon any article, its containers/wrappers, or
accompanying such article at any time while held for sale. Those same materials
are “advertising” within the meaning of Utah’s Kratom Consumer Protection Act
and also “represent” and “hold out” the kratom product within the meaning of that
Act.
Id. at 8–9 n.18.
It is difficult to follow the logical leaps and seeming nonsequiturs on which this cryptic
argument appears to be built or otherwise to make heads or tails of it. The court notes, however,
that the Kratom Regulation Act repeals Section 4-45-102(4)(b), the definitional provision on
which Plaintiffs appear to rely, and that Plaintiffs do not identify—nor has the court located—
any other provision of the Kratom Consumer Protection Act “that prohibits labeling not in
accordance with the Act.” The court accordingly does not address this argument further.
6

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.461

Page 7

be impliedly pre-empted where it is impossible for a private party to comply with both state and
federal requirements.” Mutual Pharm. Co. v. Bartlett, 570 U.S. 472, 480 (2013) (cleaned up).
21 U.S.C. § 321(ff) defines the term “dietary supplement,” as used in the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act. The statutory definition includes “a vitamin; a mineral; an herb or other
botanical; an amino acid; a dietary substance for use by man to supplement the diet by increasing
the total dietary intake; or a concentrate, metabolite, constituent, extract, or combination of any”
of the previously listed ingredients. Id. (cleaned up). 21 U.S.C. § 342(f), in turn, specifies the
circumstances in which “a dietary supplement” “shall be deemed to be adulterated.”
But even if feel free falls within the federal definition of a dietary supplement and does
not meet statutory criteria for being deemed to be adulterated, these federal statutes do not
require that feel free be sold. Indeed, these generally applicable statutes do not even amount to
specific federal approval of this product. Rather, the most that can be said is that because feel
free meets the federal definition of a dietary supplement and does not meet the criteria of being
deemed adulterated, its sale is not prohibited by federal law. It naturally follows that it is not
impossible to comply with the Kratom Regulation Act’s prohibition of products that mix kratom
with non-kratom substances without violating either Section 321(ff) or Section 342(f). Stated
plainly, the Plaintiffs can comply with both state and federal law simply by declining to sell feel
free in Utah. Further, as the Supreme Court has previously explained in an analogous context, “it
is illogical to infer that by excluding certain . . . behavior from” a “ban, . . . Congress intended to
pre-empt the States’ power to prohibit any conduct within that exclusion.” Exxon Corp. v.
Governor of Maryland, 437 U.S. 117, 132 (1978).
Although the Plaintiffs do not cite it, Bartlett does hold that under some circumstances,
“an actor seeking to satisfy both his federal- and state-law obligations is not required to cease

7

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.462

Page 8

acting altogether in order to avoid liability.” 570 U.S. at 488. But the facts of that case look
nothing like those here. In Bartlett, the Supreme Court considered a prescription drug that had
been specifically approved by the FDA. And the challenged state law was a common law
“design-defect cause of action” that, the Court concluded, would require a prescription drug
manufacturer to “either . . . chang[e] [the] drug’s design or . . . chang[e] its labeling” to avoid
liability. Id. at 480, 482. But either change would take the drug out of compliance with federal
law, because the FDA had specifically approved the existing design and labeling. See id. at 486–
87. Under these circumstances, the Court found a congressional “intent to pre-empt” state law
because federal law imposes specific “duties” not to “change[] . . . a drug’s label” or to
“redesign[] the drug” once the drug has undergone the intensive FDA approval process. Id. at
477, 483, 493.
Here, by contrast, the purportedly conflicting laws are general federal statutes defining
dietary supplements and specifying the criteria for deeming a dietary supplement adulterated, on
the one hand, and a specific state-law prohibition of products that mix kratom with non-kratom
substances other than inert encapsulating agents, on the other hand. Although Congress no doubt
intended the FDA’s comprehensive drug-regulation scheme to preempt state tort law so that
pharmaceutical manufacturers who have relied on the FDA approval process can sell their
products as approved by the FDA, Congress almost certainly did not intend to bar States from
banning any product that meets the general definition of a dietary supplement but not the criteria
for being deemed adulterated. Indeed, the Ninth Circuit has concluded both that the reasoning in
Bartlett is appropriately “appl[ied] . . . only in the products liability context” and also that the
fact that “federal law touches [a] product in some way” cannot, without more, evince
congressional intent to preempt any “state sales ban[]” of such a product. Association des

8

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.463

Page 9

Eleveurs de Canards et d’Oies du Quebec v. Bonta, 33 F.4th 1107, 1116 (9th Cir. 2022). The
court agrees with this persuasive authority.
D.
The Plaintiffs also argue that it is impossible to comply with both federal law and the
Kratom Regulation Act because kratom leaves must be washed and pasteurized with heated
chlorinated water (or treated with a chemical or radiation substitute for that process) to kill
pathogenic bacteria in order to comply with federal regulations and avoid being deemed
adulterated under 21 U.S.C. § 342(f). See Dkt. No. 2 at 11. But doing so, the Plaintiffs contend,
would result in a product that does not qualify as “pure leaf kratom”—and is thus prohibited by
the Kratom Regulation Act—because washing and pasteurizing the kratom leaves would mix the
kratom with heated chlorinated water, a non-kratom substance that is not an inert encapsulating
agent. See id. at 10–12.
The Plaintiffs do not appear to represent that the heated chlorinated water used to wash
and pasteurize kratom leaves actually remains present with the leaves when they are packaged
and sold, however. And unless that is true, the court is skeptical of the Plaintiffs’ contention that
kratom leaves washed and pasteurized with heated chlorinated water prior to packaging and sale
can plausibly be considered to fall within the scope of the prohibition of “kratom product[s]”
that are “mixed or packed with a nonkratom substance.” New Utah Code § 4-45-102(5)(b)
(emphases added). Further, even if washed and pasteurized leaves do fall within the scope of that
prohibition, the court has difficulty taking seriously the Plaintiffs’ assertion that treating pure
kratom leaves with radiation, rather than heated chlorinated water, to kill pathogenic bacteria
would likewise amount to mixing or packing kratom with a nonkratom substance. See Dkt. No. 2
at 12.

9

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.464

Page 10

The court need not decide these issues, however, because the Plaintiffs have not
identified any product that they sell that would qualify as “pure leaf kratom” under the Kratom
Regulation Act but for the fact that it is washed and pasteurized. Indeed, they attempt to
demonstrate irreparable injury only with respect to the Kratom Regulation Act’s potential effect
on feel free, a product that mixes kratom with kava root, see Dkt. No. 2 at 4, and thus clearly
does not qualify as pure leaf kratom for purposes of the Act whether or not it has been washed
and pasteurized with heated chlorinated water prior to sale. For that matter, the Plaintiffs do not
identify any other specific product sold by Botanic Tonics or any other Global Kratom Coalition
sponsor, let alone any product that could be sold under the Kratom Regulation Act but for the
fact that it is washed and pasteurized with heated chlorinated water. It follows that even if the
Plaintiffs are correct that the Kratom Regulation Act’s definition of pure leaf kratom excludes
kratom that has been washed and pasteurized or treated with a chemical or radiation substitute
for that process—and thus excludes all kratom leaf products that comply with federal regulations
and qualify as unadulterated under the FDCA—they have not demonstrated with respect to this
exclusion that they are “the object[s] of the government action” they “challenge[],” and thus
have failed to show that they face any redressable injury that would flow from this exclusion.
Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 562 (1992). 4

4

For the same reasons, the court need not address the Plaintiffs’ argument that the
possible presence of trace amounts of mitragynine pseudoindoxyl in pure leaf kratom and the
scheduling of this substance would potentially bar the sale of pure leaf kratom: feel free plainly
does not qualify as pure leaf kratom because it is mixed with kava root, and the Plaintiffs have
not identified any other product they or their sponsors sell, let alone any product that would
qualify as pure leaf kratom but for the scheduling of mitragynine pseudoindoxyl.
10

Case 2:26-cv-00267-HCN-DBP

Document 28
of 11

*

*

Filed 05/04/26

PageID.465

*

For the foregoing reasons, Docket Number 2, Plaintiffs’ Motion for Preliminary
Injunction, is DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated this 4th day of May, 2026.
BY THE COURT:
_____________________________
Howard C. Nielson, Jr.
United States District Judge

11

Page 11

