                Senate Committee on Health Informational Hearing
 Kratom and 7-Hydroxymitragynine: Public Health Concerns and Regulatory Challenges
                          February 18, 2026 – 1:30p.m.

Background
Kratom (Mitragyna speciosa) is a tropical plant native to Southeast Asia. Kratom leaves have
traditionally been chewed or brewed into teas to treat fatigue, pain, diarrhea, fever, and opioid
withdrawal. People typically use kratom by swallowing raw plant matter in capsule or powder
form, by mixing kratom powder into food or drinks, brewing the leaves as tea, or taking liquid
kratom extract. At low doses, kratom is a mild stimulant, but higher doses elicit sedative and
analgesic responses due to substances in the plant that activate opioid receptors. Studies indicate
that kratom can be habit-forming, and studies of regular kratom leaf tea drinkers described
physical and psychological withdrawal symptoms in those who ceased use.1 Over the past few
years, some manufacturers have developed new, more potent products by extracting the primary
alkaloid in the kratom plant, mitragynine, and converting it into more powerful substances,
including 7-hydroxymitragynine (7-OH). The proliferation of kratom and products containing
kratom derivatives, paired with a regulatory gray area and enforcement gaps, have made these
products readily available to Californians. Despite being deemed unlawful by both the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) and the California Department of Public Health (CDPH), these
products are widely available on the shelves of smoke and vape shops, gas stations, and
convenience stores. This hearing is intended to examine what is known about the health effects
of kratom’s active alkaloids, their potential for abuse, and the challenges associated with
regulating the labeling, marketing, and sale of these products.

Kratom’s active alkaloids
Kratom leaves contain a blend of many biologically active alkaloids that contribute to its
psychoactivity. The kratom plant itself has at least two different chemotypes currently grown
within the U.S. Although these strains display variations in minor alkaloid profiles (which are
also dependent on plant age, growing conditions, and processing methods), mitragynine is the
most abundant alkaloid in all plants.

Mitragynine is a partial μ-opioid receptor agonist that exhibits pain-blocking effects in animal
studies, about 66 times less active than morphine.2,3 Studies of mitragynine’s reward and abuse
potential are mixed; several animal studies of both whole kratom leaf extract and isolated
mitragynine report a rewarding effect, while others do not.4–7
Animal studies suggest that the pain-blocking effects of mitragynine are primarily due to the
metabolism of mitragynine into 7-OH in the liver and gut.8 7-OH comprises as much as 1.6% of
the plant’s alkaloid content, but is often undetectable in fresh kratom leaves.7 Oxidation of
mitragynine into 7-OH can be achieved through a variety of processes, including drying and
processing of kratom leaves, metabolism of mitragynine in the liver and intestine, or chemical
oxidation. Pharmacologically, 7-OH is much more potent than mitragynine. 7-OH has a 7- to 15-
fold higher affinity3,9,10 for μ-opioid receptors than mitragynine, and a 4- to 40-fold increase in
potency.2,3,8-10 Pain-blocking tests in mice reveal that 7-OH is over 350 times more effective than
mitragynine as an analgesic, superior even to morphine.3,10 Behavioral studies in animals also
suggest that 7-OH is a rewarding, habit-forming substance liable for abuse, similar to other
opioids.4,6,7 Given this pharmacological profile and potential for abuse, 7-OH has been declared a
dangerous substance by the FDA. Proponents of 7-OH, however, argue that it can be a helpful
harm-reduction substance because 7-OH’s mechanism of action is less likely to cause respiratory
depression than substances like fentanyl.4,11

7-OH itself can be converted into even more potent molecules like mitragynine pseudoindoxyl, a
comparatively higher-affinity, higher-potency μ-opioid receptor agonist,3 or molecules developed
by medicinal chemistry programs even more effective than 7-OH and morphine.12 The most
potent of these, MGM-16, is currently prohibitively expensive to synthesize, but MGM-15 has
begun to emerge onto consumer markets, marketed alongside 7-OH as a kratom derivative.13-15
Although animal studies of some of these molecules suggest potentially fewer side effects and
lower addictive potential,3,12 very little is currently known about the health effects of these
molecules in humans.

Data on adverse events and fatalities
Kratom use is rising in the U.S., especially among those who are seeking to self-medicate for
chronic pain, mental health conditions, or opioid withdrawal.16–18 Social media analyses from the
National Drug Early Warning System identify increasing kratom and 7-OH product discussion,
rising steadily from June 2024 to May 2025. As kratom products increase in popularity, so do
reports of adverse events. National Poison Control data from 2010 to 2019 indicate sharp
increases in kratom exposures, but the specific alkaloid profiles of the kratom products are often
not reported.19–21 An analysis of 935 single-substance kratom exposure cases reported between
2011 and 2018 found that most exposures occurred via oral ingestion—typically as tablets,
capsules, or powder—with the most frequently reported adverse effects including agitation, rapid
heartbeat, drowsiness, and vomiting. Although rare, severe adverse effects included seizures,
withdrawal, hallucinations, respiratory depression, coma, and cardiac or respiratory arrest.21
Older adults also saw sharp increases in exposure after 2016, with a higher proportion
experiencing adverse effects than younger adults; more than two-thirds of the exposures reported
to poison control among older adults required significant medical intervention.20

Although naturally present at nearly undetectable concentrations in kratom leaves, processing
and isolation of 7-OH from kratom allows for even more potent products in the kratom market,
often in the forms of chewable or dissolvable tablets, shots, gummies, drink mixes, vape pens,
capsules, or syrups. Dissolvable or intranasal formats can increase absorption and circulation in
the body, further complicating dosing for consumers.15,22 An analysis of 53 human exposures to

Senate Committee on Health Informational Hearing
Kratom and 7-Hydroxymitragynine: Public Health Concerns and Regulatory Challenges
Page 2
7-OH in the National Poison Data System from February to April 2025 highlights that the
majority of cases (37) were single-substance exposures. Of the single-substance exposures, 35%
resulted in “moderate clinical outcomes,” a designation used by poison control centers that
indicates pronounced, prolonged, or systemic issues that require treatment but are not life-
threatening (i.e., acid-base disturbances, disorientation, isolated and brief seizures, treatable
blood pressure changes, or acute liver injury). Notably, five of the single-substance exposure
cases were children under 18 years of age.7

Reports of deaths resulting from kratom are rare, given that kratom alkaloids are not commonly
screened for in toxicology panels, but seem to be rising. An international study of 156 deaths
involving kratom revealed the vast majority of these deaths occurred in young white males with
a history of drug use. Kratom was the sole substance implicated in 27 of these cases, with cause
of death most often related to pulmonary or cerebral edema or cardiovascular complications.
Polysubstance cases involving kratom were more common, particularly in combination with
other opioids, benzodiazepines, and recreational stimulants.18 A Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) report on overdose deaths from 2016–2017 identified kratom in 0.56% of
deaths (152 total). Nearly 60% of these deaths were determined to be caused by kratom,
including seven for which kratom was the only substance detected in postmortem toxicology
reports.23 Between 2023 and 2025, the Drug Enforcement Administration’s (DEA) Toxicology
Testing program database identified a threefold increase in fatalities involving kratom or kratom
derivatives compared to the three years prior.7 In California, Los Angeles County identified six
deaths attributable to 7-OH in 2025, often in conjunction with alcohol use, in otherwise healthy
young adults.24

Federal and state regulatory status of kratom and 7-OH
In 2016, the DEA published a notice of intent to temporarily place mitragynine and 7-OH into
Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act, alongside other substances with no accepted
medical use and a high potential for abuse. This effort was withdrawn after the DEA received
numerous public comments and a bipartisan Congressional letter that expressed concerns about
overly hasty regulation.

According to the FDA, kratom is not lawfully marketed in the U.S. as a drug product, dietary
supplement, or food additive in conventional food. No prescription or over-the-counter products
containing kratom or its alkaloids are legally available on the U.S. market. The FDA considers
kratom a “new dietary ingredient” because it was not marketed as a dietary ingredient in the U.S.
prior to October 15, 1994. Because new dietary ingredients require evidence of safety before
marketing, any products labeled as dietary supplements that contain kratom are not permitted.
Accordingly, the FDA has issued import alerts for kratom and has seized kratom products
marketed as dietary supplements.25,26

More recently, the FDA appears to have directed its enforcement efforts towards products
supplemented with 7-OH. In 2025, the agency published a technical report on 7-OH, issued
consumer warnings, sent warning letters to retailers, and conducted seizures of 7-OH-containing
products. Last summer, the FDA formally recommended that the DEA move 7-OH to Schedule I,


Senate Committee on Health Informational Hearing
Kratom and 7-Hydroxymitragynine: Public Health Concerns and Regulatory Challenges
Page 3
with FDA Commissioner Dr. Marty Makary stating, “we’re not targeting the kratom leaf or
ground up kratom, we are targeting the concentrated synthetic byproduct.”

Review of state laws on kratom across the nation
According to a Legislative Analysis and Public Policy Association report, as of January 2026, 30
states and the District of Columbia regulate kratom or its components in some manner. In six
states (Alabama, Arkansas, Indiana, Louisiana, Vermont, and Wisconsin), both mitragynine and
7-OH are controlled substances, effectively banning all kratom products. Connecticut is currently
in the rulemaking process to also schedule both mitragynine and 7-OH. The remaining 23 states
and the District of Columbia regulate the possession, sale, or manufacture of kratom products.
Within these states, most restrict kratom sales to adults 21 years of age or older, although seven
states restrict kratom sales to those over 18. The legality of 7-OH also varies in these states:
while Ohio and Florida have scheduled 7-OH as a controlled substance, eleven states have
banned the sale of products containing 7-OH at greater than 1%-2% of the product’s alkaloid
content (Arizona, Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Rhode
Island, South Dakota, Texas, and Utah) or which contain synthetic 7-OH (Nebraska, Tennessee,
and South Carolina). Twenty states, including California, do not have laws regulating kratom.

Status of kratom regulation in California
While there is no specific California statute on kratom, the Sherman Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Law (Sherman Law) regulates the manufacturing, processing, labeling, advertising, and sale of
food, drugs, and cosmetics under the administration and enforcement of CDPH in accordance
with the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. Given the FDA’s determination that kratom is
not approved as a dietary ingredient, dietary supplement, or drug, the Sherman Law treats
kratom-containing products as adulterated ingredients or supplements illegal to sell for
consumption. In January, CDPH issued a memo to licensed tobacco retailers regarding a
“Prohibition on the Sale of Kratom and 7-OH Products,” stating that the retail and online sale of
kratom and 7-OH is illegal under HSC §110555 (adulterated food). This letter does not make a
distinction between leaf kratom and 7-OH containing products.

CDPH’s Center for Environmental Health is responsible for enforcing the Sherman Law,
including product testing and seizure, along with certain counties with delegated enforcement
authority (Los Angeles, Orange, and San Bernardino). Additionally, the California Retail Food
Code provides counties and other local environmental health departments with authority to
enforce food laws, including preventing the sale of adulterated food. However, the Retail Food
Code only applies to retail food facilities, leaving most local public health agencies without the
authority to enforce prohibitions on the sale of specific ingredients at gas stations and other
locations.

To address this limited enforcement capacity based on state law, several counties and cities have
enacted local ordinances to regulate or prohibit the sale of kratom and 7-OH. Riverside County,
Fresno County, and Orange County prohibit the sale and distribution of kratom products to those
under 21, and additionally prohibit products that contain more than 2% 7-OH. The cities of
Oceanside and Jurupa Valley prohibit the sale, distribution, and possession of all kratom
products, and Newport Beach prohibits the sale and distribution of kratom leaf and synthetic

Senate Committee on Health Informational Hearing
Kratom and 7-Hydroxymitragynine: Public Health Concerns and Regulatory Challenges
Page 4
alkaloid products. The City of San Diego defines mitragynine and 7-OH as novel psychoactive
drugs and has prohibited the sale, distribution, or possession of these products. A number of
cities have indicated they are considering kratom regulation in some form.

Labeling and consumer safety concerns
Due to the fact that the FDA does not recognize kratom products as drugs, supplements, or
dietary ingredients, no specific testing or labeling is required, meaning that consumers may not
be aware of the specific alkaloid blends or dosages contained in a given product. One study of 7-
OH supplemented products found that 92% were advertised as kratom, potentially misleading
consumers about the potency of the product, especially when combined with advertising that
spotlighted general wellness claims rather than drug claims.22 Another market analysis revealed
that fewer than half of mitragynine pseudoindoxyl-containing kratom product descriptions
mentioned an increased risk of intoxication, tolerance, dependence, withdrawal, or addiction.27 A
conflation of products containing kratom alkaloid extracts with botanical kratom has been
highlighted as a safety concern by the FDA, and the agency has begun issuing warning letters to
online retailers who sell 7-OH-supplemented products.

The FDA’s recent enforcement actions against the marketing of 7-OH products may be
contributing to a lack of clarity about the safety and intended use of various kratom preparations.
Some online retailers of kratom products tout that their products are “not for human or animal
consumption,” while simultaneously being advertised as being “food-grade,”28 providing mixed
messages about how these products are meant to be used. Finally, the formats of some of these
products (flavored syrups or shots, gummies, vape pens) are likely appealing to children. A
market analysis of products containing mitragynine pseudoindoxyl found that 69% used child-
appealing flavors or scents and 63% used bright colors in packaging or labeling.27

Legislative history
AB 2365 (Haney of 2023) would have added kratom products to the Sherman Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Law. Kratom processors would be required to register their products with CDPH
annually and would establish a fee that would be used to prescribe specified quantities of
alkaloids and establish labeling and packaging requirements and annual laboratory certification
of products. It would also prohibit the sale of kratom leaf or kratom-containing products to those
under 21 years of age and in inhalable forms or forms attractive to children. AB 2365 was held in
the Assembly.

SB 758 (Umberg of 2026), as amended on January 5, 2026, among other provisions, would have
added products containing 7-OH, except as it naturally occurs in kratom, to Schedule I, making
the sale or distribution of these products a misdemeanor. The 7-OH section was amended out of
SB 758.

AB 1088 (Bains of 2025) requires persons to be 21 years of age to purchase a kratom product
and prohibits selling a kratom product that is attractive to children. AB 1088 also prohibits the
selling of products with a level of 7-OH that is greater than 2% of the total kratom alkaloids in
the product. AB 1088 is pending in the Senate Health Committee.


Senate Committee on Health Informational Hearing
Kratom and 7-Hydroxymitragynine: Public Health Concerns and Regulatory Challenges
Page 5
References

1.      Singh, D., Müller, C. P. & Vicknasingam, B. K. Kratom (Mitragyna speciosa)
dependence, withdrawal symptoms and craving in regular users. Drug Alcohol Depend 139, 132–
137 (2014).
2.      Matsumoto, K. et al. Antinociceptive action of mitragynine in mice: evidence for the
involvement of supraspinal opioid receptors. Life Sci 59, 1149–1155 (1996).
3.      Váradi, A. et al. Mitragynine/Corynantheidine Pseudoindoxyls As Opioid Analgesics
with Mu Agonism and Delta Antagonism, Which Do Not Recruit β-Arrestin-2. J Med Chem 59,
8381–8397 (2016).
4.      Gutridge, A. M. et al. G protein-biased kratom-alkaloids and synthetic carfentanil-amide
opioids as potential treatments for alcohol use disorder. British Journal of Pharmacology 177,
1497–1513 (2020).
5.      Harun, N., Hassan, Z., Navaratnam, V., Mansor, S. M. & Shoaib, M. Discriminative
stimulus properties of mitragynine (kratom) in rats. Psychopharmacology 232, 2227–2238
(2015).
6.      Hemby, S. E., McIntosh, S., Leon, F., Cutler, S. J. & McCurdy, C. R. Abuse liability and
therapeutic potential of the Mitragyna speciosa (kratom) alkaloids mitragynine and 7-
hydroxymitragynine. Addict Biol 24, 874–885 (2019).
7.      Chad J. Reissig et al. 7-Hydroxymitragynine (7-OH): An Assessment of the Scientific
Data and Toxicological Concerns around an Emerging Opioid Threat.
https://www.fda.gov/files/drugs/published/7-hydroxymitragynin_7-
oh_an_assessment_of_the_scientific_data_and_toxicological_concerns_around_an_emerging_op
ioid_threat.pdf (2025).
8.      Kruegel, A. C. et al. 7-Hydroxymitragynine Is an Active Metabolite of Mitragynine and a
Key Mediator of Its Analgesic Effects. ACS Cent. Sci. 5, 992–1001 (2019).
9.      Todd, D. A. et al. Chemical composition and biological effects of kratom (Mitragyna
speciosa): In vitro studies with implications for efficacy and drug interactions. Sci Rep 10, 19158
(2020).
10.     Obeng, S. et al. Pharmacological Comparison of Mitragynine and 7-
Hydroxymitragynine: In Vitro Affinity and Efficacy for μ-Opioid Receptor and Opioid-Like
Behavioral Effects in Rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 376, 410–427 (2021).
11.     Schmid, C. L. et al. Bias factor and therapeutic window correlate to predict safer opioid
analgesics. Cell 171, 1165-1175.e13 (2017).
12.     Matsumoto, K. et al. Orally Active Opioid μ/δ Dual Agonist MGM-16, a Derivative of
the Indole Alkaloid Mitragynine, Exhibits Potent Antiallodynic Effect on Neuropathic Pain in
Mice. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 348, 383–392 (2014).
13.     Get Well Depot. 7-OH Products Online – 7-Hydroxymitragynine for Sale - Get Well
Depot. https://getwelldepot.com/7oh-kratom/.
14.     Gour, A. et al. From Kratom to Semi-Synthetic Opioids: The Rise and Risks of MGM-15.
Drug Testing and Analysis 17, 2384–2389 (2025).
15.     Alsbrook, S., Pro, G. & Koturbash, I. From kratom to 7-hydroxymitragynine: evolution
of a natural remedy into a public-health threat. Pharm Biol 63, 896–911.
16.     Grundmann, O. Patterns of Kratom use and health impact in the US: Results from an
online survey. Drug Alcohol Depend 176, 63–70 (2017).

Senate Committee on Health Informational Hearing
Kratom and 7-Hydroxymitragynine: Public Health Concerns and Regulatory Challenges
Page 6
17.     Smith, K. E. et al. Ecological Momentary Assessment of Self-Reported Kratom Use,
Effects, and Motivations Among US Adults. JAMA Netw Open 7, e2353401 (2024).
18.     Corkery, J. M. et al. Characteristics of deaths associated with kratom use. J
Psychopharmacol 33, 1102–1123 (2019).
19.     Anwar, M. Notes from the Field: Kratom (Mitragyna speciosa) Exposures Reported to
Poison Centers — United States, 2010–2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 65, (2016).
20.     Graves, J. M. et al. Kratom exposures among older adults reported to U.S. poison centers,
2014-2019. J Am Geriatr Soc 69, 2176–2184 (2021).
21.     Eggleston, W., Stoppacher, R., Suen, K., Marraffa, J. M. & Nelson, L. S. Kratom Use and
Toxicities in the United States. Pharmacotherapy 39, 775–777 (2019).
22.     Hill, K., Boyer, E. W., Grundmann, O. & Smith, K. E. De facto opioids: Characterization
of novel 7-hydroxymitragynine and mitragynine pseudoindoxyl product marketing. Drug
Alcohol Depend 272, 112701 (2025).
23.     O’Malley Olsen, E., O’Donnell, J., Mattson, C. L., Schier, J. G. & Wilson, N. Notes from
the Field: Unintentional Drug Overdose Deaths with Kratom Detected — 27 States, July 2016–
December 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 68, (2019).
24.     County of Los Angeles. Additional Fatal Overdoses Tied to Synthetic Kratom in Los
Angeles County. https://lacounty.gov/2025/10/10/additional-fatal-overdoses-tied-to-synthetic-
kratom-in-los-angeles-county/ (2025).
25.     FDA. Import Alert 54-15.
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cms_ia/importalert_1137.html.
26.     FDA. FDA Roundup: May 05, 2023. https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-
announcements/fda-roundup-may-05-2023 (2024).
27.     White, C. M., Belcourt, J. & Sedensky, A. A Descriptive Assessment of Products
Containing the Opioid Receptor Stimulator Mitragynine Pseudoindoxyl. Subst Use Misuse 60,
1950–1954 (2025).
28.     Shaman’s Garden. Kratom 50% Powdered Extract - Precision Lab Crafted.
https://www.shamansgarden.com/p-1592-kratom-precision-50-kratom-extract.aspx.




Senate Committee on Health Informational Hearing
Kratom and 7-Hydroxymitragynine: Public Health Concerns and Regulatory Challenges
Page 7
