                                                                                   A Professional Corporation

                                                                                        11808 WOLF RUN LANE
                                                                                           CLIFTON, VA 20124
                                                                                         JEMORD@EMORD.COM


                                          July 21, 2026

Re: Temporary Placement of 7-Hydroxymitragynine Above a Specified Threshold in Schedule I,
                Request for Information, Docket No. HHS-OASH-2026-0232

        Global Kratom Coalition, Inc., by counsel, hereby submits these comments in response to
the request published in the above-referenced docket. GKC is a non-profit public advocacy
organization that represents those who sell natural kratom leaf products, supports demonstrably
safe and responsible use of natural kratom leaf, and opposes synthetic alkaloid concentrates, such
as 7-hydroxymitragynine (7-OH) when above the threshold limits specified by HHS and DEA.
         The purpose of this comment is to alert the agency to an abuse of the rulemaking process
potentially actionable under 21 U.S.C. § 331(a) and 18 U.S.C. § 371 by certain parties that are
inducing the submission of public comments in response to this docket by offering in exchange
either concentrated synthetic 7-OH tablets or discounts on the purchase of them. The evidence
of this abuse is presented hereinbelow.

    Evidence of Provision of Illicit Concentrated Synthetic 7-OH and Store Credits for
      Concentrated Synthetic 7-OH in Exchange for Comments in This Proceeding

          Pure Leaf Kratom, a seller of Concentrated Synthetic 7-OH, via
https://pureleafkratom.com/understanding-7oh-ban, is offering 6 free 300 mg OPIA 7-OH tablets
to each person who signs a petition against scheduling of concentrated synthetic 7-OH and files
a comment in this proceeding. The site also invites consumers to “stock up now while inventory
is still available—this window is closing fast,” stating “this is your last opportunity to purchase
concentrated 7-Hydroxymitragynine products legally. We encourage all customers to make
informed decisions and secure their supply while it’s still available.” The group identifies itself
as affiliated with HART and 7 Hope Alliance.
         7-OH, another seller of concentrated synthetic 7-OH, includes on its web site,
https://7oh.com/pages/7-oh-federal-scheduling-facts-deadlines-and-how-to-comment, an offer of
“$20 in 7OH.com store credit” for each person who files a comment in this proceeding.

        ELYXR, another seller of concentrated synthetic 7-
OH, https://www.elyxr.com/blog/federal-7-oh-scheduling-what-it-means-for-your-
orders/?srsltid=AfmBOoqWVjJae_xrl-nS_i9uRY8AszcHOlpnb5-oRTbx9aRSOeKoxLDx&utm,
offers those who comment in this proceeding a “$30 in store credit,” stating “Make your voice
heard on the federal 7-OH proposal, and we will add $30 to your Elyxr account as a thank you.”
        In an effort to induce the submission of comments in opposition to concentrated
synthetic 7-OH scheduling through this proceeding, these parties have provided incentives to
consumers in the form of adulterated products that are unlawful to distribute and sell in the
United States, indeed the very products that are the subject of FDA action, FDA recommendation
for DEA scheduling, and DEA’s Notice of Temporary Scheduling. As explained below, the offer
to provide the adulterated products either directly or at a discount violates 21 U.S.C. § 331(a)
and possibly 18 U.S.C. § 371.

   Present Adulterated Status of concentrated synthetic 7-OH Under 21 U.S.C. § 331(a)
         Even before FDA recommendation of, and DEA publication of, the Notice of Temporary
Scheduling of 7-OH, Mitragynine Pseudoindoxyl, MGM-15, and MGM-16, FDA made clear that
concentrated synthetic 7-OH was adulterated and unlawful for sale in the United States. Under
21 U.S.C. § 331(a), the introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate commerce of an
adulterated dietary supplement, food, or drug is prohibited. Violations of 21 U.S.C. § 331 are
subject to criminal penalties under 21 U.S.C. § 333, including imprisonment of up to one year for
first-time violations and up to three years for violations committed with intent to defraud or
mislead.

         In July 2025, concurrent with its recommendation to DEA that concentrated synthetic 7-
OH be scheduled as a Schedule I substance, FDA began investigations of companies engaged in
the manufacture, sale, and distribution of concentrated synthetic 7-OH. FDA issued warning
letters to over one dozen manufacturers, sellers, and distributors of concentrated synthetic 7-
OH products explaining that the products are adulterated and not lawful dietary supplements,
food additives, or ingredients in any approved drug. The FDA also coordinated the seizure of
approximately 73,000 units of concentrated synthetic 7-OH products and indicated
enforcement is focused on concentrated products. These actions indicate federal restrictions on
distributing and selling concentrated synthetic 7-OH products under the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act, independent of CSA scheduling.

         It is therefore in furtherance of illegal activity that those responsible for promoting the
submission of comments in support of concentrated synthetic 7-OH are providing in return free
concentrated synthetic 7-OH tablets or discounts on purchase of concentrated synthetic 7-OH
products. It may also constitute a criminal conspiracy to abuse FDA’s comment process in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 371. The FDA should investigate each of these parties to determine if
referrals ought to be made to the Department of Justice for criminal investigation and/or
prosecution. The agency should investigate to determine precisely which comments have been
filed in response to these offers and whether the commenting parties have all revealed the
incentive given them to file so that the agency may determine if the conspiracy has given rise to
a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 371.

  Criminal Prohibition Against Abuse of Agency Comment Proceedings, 18 U.S.C. § 371



                                                 2
        The federal conspiracy statute, 18 U.S.C. § 371, makes it a crime for two or more persons
to conspire to defraud the United States or any agency in any manner or for any purpose. Courts
have interpreted "defraud" to encompass any conspiracy to impair, obstruct, or defeat the lawful
function of any department or agency of the United States by corrupt or dishonest means. United
States v. Shoup, 608 F.2d 950, 964 (3d Cir. 1979); United States v. Coplan, 703 F.3d 46, 61 (2d
Cir. 2012). The statute does not require that the government suffer a financial loss; it is sufficient
that the conspiracy is calculated to impair or obstruct a lawful government function.

        Agency comment processes are a critical and lawful function of federal agencies,
including HHS. Orchestrating a campaign to flood the HHS comment docket with incentivized
comments — particularly when the incentive is the provision of the very illicit substance that is
the subject of proposed scheduling due to its highly addictive nature— may constitute a
conspiracy to impair the integrity of the rulemaking process by dishonest means, in violation of §
371. A corrupt or dishonest element exists in the concealment of the incentive (here, the illicit
drug in exchange for the comment) if the submitted comments themselves do not reveal the
incentive given for the comments.

                                                Conclusion

        By these comments, GKC alerts the FDA to a conspiracy among sellers of concentrated
synthetic 7-OH to flood this docket with incentivized comments. The above-described actions
of Pure Leaf Kratom, 7-OH, and Elyxr to induce consumers to file comments in opposition to
proposed scheduling of concentrated synthetic 7-OH by either supplying them with that
adulterated substance or by supplying them with dollar discounts on the purchase of that
adulterated substance violates federal adulteration law, 21 U.S.C. 331(a), and may constitute a
conspiracy to impair, obstruct or defeat this proceeding in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 371. The
agency should investigate these specific parties, identify all comments filed in response to these
incentives, determine if the commenters have revealed the incentive given to them in the
comments, and determine if evidence sufficient for a Justice Department referral exists under the
respective statutes. At a minimum, the agency should take into account the illicit incentive when
determining the weight to be given the comments affected.



                                               Sincerely,

                                               /s/ Jonathan Emord

                                               Jonathan W. Emord,
                                               Counsel to Global Kratom Coalition, Inc.




                                                  3
