{
"@context": "https://schema.org",
"@graph": [
{
"@type": "Article",
"headline": "FDA Issues Warning Letters to Firms Marketing Products Containing 7-Hydroxymitragynine",
"name": "FDA Issues Warning Letters to Firms Marketing Products Containing 7-Hydroxymitragynine",
"description": "FDA Issues Warning Letters to Firms Marketing Products Containing 7-Hydroxymitragynine",
"datePublished": "Tue, 07/15/2025 - 11:36",
"dateModified": "Tue, 07/15/2025 - 10:00",
"author": {
"@type": "Organization",
"name": "Office of the Commissioner"
},
"publisher": {
"@type": "Organization",
"name": "FDA"
}
}
]
}
FDA Issues Warning Letters to Firms Marketing Products Containing 7-Hydroxymitragynine | FDA
Skip to main content
Skip to FDA Search
Skip to in this section menu
Skip to footer links
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
The .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site.
The site is secure.
The
https://
ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
Recall Alert
An update on the Cyclospora outbreak available
here
.
&nbsp;
Search
&nbsp;
Menu
Search FDA
Submit search
Featured
Report a Product Problem
Contact FDA
FDA Guidance Documents
Recalls, Market Withdrawals and Safety Alerts
Press Announcements
Warning Letters
Advisory Committees
En Espa&#241ol
Products
Food
Drugs
Medical Devices
Radiation-Emitting Products
Vaccines, Blood, and Biologics
Animal and Veterinary
Cosmetics
Tobacco Products
Topics
About FDA
Combination Products
Regulatory Information
Safety
Emergency Preparedness
International Programs
News and Events
Training and Continuing Education
Inspections and Compliance
Science and Research
Information For
Consumers
Patients
Industry
Health Professionals
Federal, State and Local Officials
Home
News &amp; Events
FDA Newsroom
Press Announcements
FDA Issues Warning Letters to Firms Marketing Products Containing 7-Hydroxymitragynine
Press Announcements
In this section
Press Announcements
FDA News Release
FDA Issues Warning Letters to Firms Marketing Products Containing 7-Hydroxymitragynine
Alkaloid known as 7-OH is not a lawful dietary supplement, food additive, or ingredient in any approved drug
More Press Announcements
For Immediate Release:
July 15, 2025
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today announced seven recent warning letters sent to companies for illegally marketing products containing 7-hydroxymitragynine, also known as 7-OH.
1
&nbsp;This action reflects the Agency’s growing concern around novel potent opioid products being marketed to U.S. consumers and sold online and in smoke shops, gas stations, and corner stores. While 7-OH occurs naturally in trace amounts in
kratom
, the Agency’s letters focus on concentrated 7-OH products such as tablets, gummies, drink mixes, and shots, which may be dangerous.&nbsp;
7-OH is not lawful in dietary supplements and cannot be lawfully added to conventional foods. Additionally, there are no FDA-approved drugs containing 7-OH, and it is illegal to market any drugs containing 7-OH. Consumers who use 7-OH products are exposing themselves to products that have not been proven safe or effective for any use.
The warning letters address the illegal marketing of
products containing 7-OH
. These letters specifically focus on products containing 7-OH as an added ingredient or enhanced levels of 7-OH. Some products are adulterated conventional foods or dietary supplements because 7-OH does not meet the relevant safety standard. Others are unapproved new drugs with unproven claims such as relieving pain and managing anxiety.
The FDA issued warning letters to:
Shaman Botanicals, LLC
My Smoke Wholesale
Relax Relief Rejuvenate Trading, LLC dba RRR Trading or EDP Kratom
Thang Botanicals, Inc. dba 7ΩHMZ, 7-OHMZ, or 7OHMZ
Royal Diamond Imports, Inc. dba Roxytabs.com
Hydroxie, LLC
7Tabz Retail, LLC
The letters requested that the recipients respond within 15 business days.
Media:
HHS Request for Comment
202-690-6343
Consumer:
888-INFO-FDA
1
Also known as 7-OH-mitragynine, 7-OHMG, and 7-HMG
###
Boilerplate
The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, radiation-emitting electronic products, and for regulating tobacco products.
Content current as of:
07/15/2025
Follow FDA
Follow @US_FDA
on X
Follow FDA
on Facebook
Follow @FDAMedia
on X
Feedback
FDA Archive
About FDA
Accessibility
Visitor Information
Website Policies / Privacy
No FEAR Act
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
FOIA
HHS.gov
USA.gov
Contact FDA
Follow FDA on Facebook
Follow FDA on X
Follow FDA on Instagram
Follow FDA on LinkedIn
View FDA videos on YouTube
Subscribe to FDA RSS feeds
Contact Number
1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)
Back to
Top
