                                               March 18, 2026



The Honorable Martin A. Makary, M.D., M.P.H.
Commissioner of Food and Drugs
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Ave.
Silver Spring, MD 20993

Commissioner Makary:

We appreciate the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) targeting 7-hydroxymitragynine (7-
OH), a concentrated byproduct of the kratom plant. As you know, 7-OH is an opioid that can be
more potent than morphine. We are particularly concerned with the products that appeal to
teenagers and children. Kratom-derived concentrates in forms like tablets, gummies, and drink
mixes are available online and in gas stations. This makes them easily accessible and attractive to
young Americans.

Recommending scheduling action of 7-OH under the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) is an
important first step. However, we encourage you to consider scheduling the whole kratom leaf,
given that some of the most accessible and addictive products contain whole kratom leaf, not 7-
OH.

So-called “herbal supplements” are sold at many gas stations and retailers across the country.
Their ingredients include kava extract, which the company says promotes relaxation and lifts
mood. They also include kratom leaf, which is said to enhance energy and focus. The supplement
only contains trace amounts of 7-OH, so it would not be regulated under the CSA if 7-OH is
scheduled.1

To be clear, the kratom leaf acts on mu-opioid receptors, similar to opioids.2 Frequent use leads
to tolerance, dependence and withdrawal symptoms that resemble those from morphine or
heroin. Reported side effects of kratom include nausea, vomiting, constipation, tremors,
seizures, hallucinations, elevated blood pressure and liver damage.3

Young people across the country have reported growing addicted to kratom supplements,
consuming up to a dozen products a day and going through severe withdrawal symptoms after

1
  https://www.reuters.com/press-releases/botanic-tonics-feel-free-applauds-florida-ban-synthetic-7-oh-2025-08-13/
2
  Smith, K. E., Grundmann, O., Swogger, M. T., & Garcia-Romeu, A. (2023). Kratom (Mitragyna speciosa):
Pharmacology and use of a naturally occurring atypical opioid. In The Oxford Handbook of Opioids and Opioid Use
Disorder (pp. 386-418). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780197618431.013.15
3
  https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/prescription-drug-abuse/in-depth/kratom/art-20402171
ceasing use.4 Some cities, counties and states have responded by banning kratom or raising the
minimum purchase age to 18 or 21. But in many areas, enforcement remains inconsistent, and
some addiction specialists say clearer federal guidance is needed.

Singling out 7-OH to schedule would leave these addictive products on the shelf and tacitly
declare them safe for consumption. There will be no standardized control over product quality,
concentration, or labeling, allowing inconsistent and potentially dangerous products to stay on
the market.

We remain committed to protecting America’s youth from dangerous and addictive substances
and look forward to working with you to address the full scope of the rising danger of the kratom
plant through the CSA.

                                                    Sincerely,




    Pete Ricketts                                                             Richard Blumenthal
    United States Senator                                                     United States Senator




    Jeanne Shaheen                                                            Mike Crapo
    United States Senator                                                     United States Senator




    Marsha Blackburn                                                          Steve Daines
    United States Senator                                                     United States Senator




    James C. Justice                                                          Alex Padilla
    United States Senator                                                     United States Senator




4
    https://www.cnn.com/2025/08/26/health/feel-free-drink-kratom-kava-addictive-wellness
 Katie Boyd Britt                               Ted Budd
 United States Senator                          United States Senator




 John Boozman
 United States Senator



CC:

Terrance C. Cole
Administrator
United States Drug Enforcement Administration
8701 Morrissette Drive
Springfield, VA 22152


Sara Carter
Director
Office of National Drug Control Policy
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, D.C. 20500
