.....

i

~~-"-""=?

~ Ht:<51:

~tate of \leennessee
PUBLIC CHAPTER NO. 950
HOUSE BILL NO. 1649
By Representatives Helton-Haynes, Rudder, Sherrell, Doggett, Moody, Howell, Butler,
Eldridge, Hawk, Renea Jones, Moon, Wright, Reeves, Williams, Gary Hicks, Tim Hicks,
Lamberth, Alexander, Greg Martin, Hale, Barrett, Vital, Littleton, Brock Martin, Grills,
Carringer, Capley, Russell, Davis, Reneau, Maberry, Crawford, White, Marsh, McCalmon,
Todd, Vaughan, Scarbrough, Bricken, Stinnett, Boyd, Rudd, Bulso, Atchley, Slater,
Hemmer, Raper, Sparks, Garrett, Gillespie, Warner, Hakeem, Powers, Leatherwood, Gant,
Shaw, Zachary, Mitchell, Cepicky, Keisling, Mr. Speaker Sexton, Parkinson, Lankford,
Stevens, Cochran
Substituted for: Senate Bill No. 1656
By Senators Gardenhire, Hensley, Mr. Speaker McNally, Yager, Jackson, Stevens

AN ACT to amend Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 33, Chapter 2; Title 38; Title 39;
Title 50; Title 63 and Title 68, relative to Kratom.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF TENNESSEE:
SECTION 1. Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 39-17-452, is amended by deleting
subdivision (a)(3).
SECTION 2. Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 39, Chapter 17, Part 4, is amended by
adding the following as a new section:
(a) It is an offense to knowingly possess Kratom.
(b) It is an offense to knowingly manufacture, deliver, or sell Kratom.
(c) It is an offense to knowingly possess Kratom with intent to manufacture,
deliver, or sell Kratom.
(d) As used in this section, "Kratom" means any part of the mitragyna speciosa
plant containing the alkaloid mitragynine or metabolite 7-hydroxymitragynine; any
substance or compound obtained by extraction of the mitragyna speciosa leaf; any
alkaloid or alkaloid derivative that has been created by chemical synthesis or
biosynthetic means that synthetically alters the composition of any Kratom alkaloid or
alkaloid derivative; any derivative, analog, or other preparation of Kratom; and any
derivative, analog, or other preparation thereof that is substantially chemically equivalent
or identical to Kratom.
(e)

(1) A violation of subsection (a) is a Class A misdemeanor.
(2)

(A) Except as provided in subdivision (e)(2)(8), a violation of
subsection (b) or (c) is a Class C felony.
(B) A violation of subsection (b) or (c) is a Class B felony if the
violation involved the delivery or sale of Kratom to a minor from an adult
who is at least two (2) years the minor's senior, and who knows that the
person is a minor.
SECTION 3. Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 33-2-1404(a)(8), is amended by
deleting ", including Kratom
11

•

HB1649

SECTION 4. Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 38, Chapter 7, Part 1, is amended by
adding the following as a new section:
If a county medical examiner's office or regional forensic center is conducting an
autopsy on a decedent and the decedent's suspected cause of death is drug overdose,
then the county medical examiner shall test the decedent for the presence of Kratom.
SECTION 5. Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 63, Chapter 6, Part 2, is amended by
adding the following as a new section:
If a treating physician orders toxicology testing in the following circumstances,
then the toxicology testing must include testing for the presence of Kratom:
(1) Suspected drug overdose; or
(2) Suspected neonatal abstinence syndrome.
SECTION 6. Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 50, Chapter 9, is amended by adding the
following as a new section:
The commissioner of labor and workforce development shall promulgate a rule to
add Kratom to the definition of a drug, as defined in § 50-9-103. The rule must be
promulgated in accordance with the Uniform Administrative Procedures Act, compiled in
title 4, chapter 5.
SECTION 7. This act is known and may be cited as "Matthew Davenport's Law."
SECTION 8. This act takes effect July 1, 2026, the public welfare requiring it.

2

HOUSE BILL NO.

PASSED:

1649

April 16, 2026

CAMERON SEXTON, SPEAKER
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

RANDY MCNALL.:
EAKER OF THE SENA T

APPROVED this

ry#2.. day of YVJo ,
-··

-

BILL LEE, GOVERNOR

~

~

O'

-

2026

